---
layout: post
title: Why Write? To Enrich Your Own Faith
author: gheslop
image: /assets/images/why-write.jpg
featured: true
hidden: true
tags:
  - Augustine
  - Writing
  - Prayer
  - Experience
  - Christian maturity
  - ""
---
The [first article](https://rekindle.co.za/content/2024-10-22-why-write) in this series considered a recent conversation I had about why theological students won’t write—apart from their academically enforced indulgences. They offered two reasons: firstly, someone more gifted than them probably has it covered; and, secondly, their contextual challenges are too specific to be widely read or useful. These two reasons, of course, clash, which was one of the ideas behind my [second article](https://rekindle.co.za/content/2024-10-31-why-write). Sure, it’s unlikely you’re as gifted a writer as D. A. Carson or Carl Trueman. But they don’t know your culture, neither its particular challenges nor its potential for theological contributions to the universal church. Taken together, my previous two articles were an exhortation to write for the sake of others, for the unlooked for blessings. We might say those were outward looking, while this one is more inward—ultimately, to look outward again. 

Here is my third and final attempt to answer the question: "why write?" In it I consider the personal benefits of writing, how the practice of writing is a blessing for the writer too.

#### Augustine: Writing to Progress

Last year I offered [some tips](https://rekindle.co.za/content/2023-11-02-a-guide-to-writing-for-those-who-cant-write-good) for improving as a writer. By way of concluding appeal I quoted the famous line from Augustine’s *Retractions:* "I am the sort of man who writes because he has made progress, and who makes progress—by writing." Applied to the skill of writing, Augustine’s delightful turn of phrase describes the experience of every writer: a disciplined commitment to writing results in greater mastery of the craft. This much is true in essentially every sphere of life—practice makes perfect, after all.

However, Augustine’s observation can, I think, be taken another way. He says he "makes progress—by writing." This progress isn’t limited to the craft of writing, but also one’s theological understanding. Augustine "writes because he has made progress," because of his ongoing development as a thinker and theologian. This was in part why he wrote his *Retractions.* The man who wrote *Confessions* wasn’t the same one who wrote *City of God,* almost three decades later. Fundamental to his theological development was, according to Augustine, his own writing. Those who commit to the often arduous labour of writing, tend to reap the fruits of theological refinement and greater clarity.

Writing is a means to improving not only as a writer but also as a Christian thinker and disciple. That is, the discipline of regular writing is a way to progress in the technical skill or craft as well as your faith. By it we can cultivate not only writing ability but also theological acumen and affections. It’s the latter kind of progress I want to consider, below.

## Write to Test and Refine Your Theology

Firstly, writing is an outstanding means to refining your theological thoughts. We gain clarity in our own thinking as we work towards communicating them.

Listen to how [Oyewole Akande](https://africa.thegospelcoalition.org/profile/oyewole-akande) puts it, "I write because writing is the most important method I have to \[help] me to think clearly. Whenever I want to be clear in my ideas about a topic, the easiest way forward is for me to write down what I think. Often as I put my thoughts on a clear page of paper, the gaps in my logic become obvious. If I can't make a coherent argument that convinces myself, I come to see that my thoughts need more work."

Similarly, [Chopo Mwanza](https://www.chopomwanza.com), from Zambia says, "Writing helps me think clearly and logically about various subjects. When I am thinking about a particular subject, fleshing it out in writing helps with me develop clarity. \[In turn, then] writing helps with my teaching ministry. The logical clarity that \[it] brings, helps with my teaching and preaching."

Writing is an excellent way to consider and consolidate one’s own theology. It’s a way to converse with yourself, testing ideas or arguments, and anticipate counters—all the while it’s an indispensable means of becoming a more cogent and convincing theologian. 

## Write to Wrestle With God

Secondly, there is another way that we can progress by writing, as it affords us a profound avenue for spiritual growth, to wrestle with the truth and our own faith. If the previous point involves us in a conversation with ourselves and imagined readers, this one puts us in dialogue with God.

Listen to how [Eddie Ssemakula](https://muleefu.com), a Ugandan writer puts this, "I often see my writing first, as an overflow of my random attempts to commune with God, as I think through the worldly messaging I often swim in, I rarely schedule it, yet I love the muse when it arrives." Those who feel this is an exaggeration would do well to remember that Augustine’s *Confessions* was penned as a sustained prayer to God. And who of us haven’t benefitted from reading the journals of the great saints who went before us?

[Eleanor Kwizera](https://africa.thegospelcoalition.org/profile/eleanor-kwizera), another Ugandan contributor at TGC Africa, writes, "I usually write when I am in the thicket of my Christian walk, when my vision is clouded, when a lot does not make sense…because it helps me acknowledge where I am and ponder on the facts rather than my emotions. I write to reinforce my convictions in who God is. Once my convictions are in place, I always find that my emotions will align." As Eleanor puts it, writing is a way to reinforce her faith when things are difficult. It’s way for us to prayerfully turn over the truth God’s promises to us and his character.

#### Share the Fruits of Writing

This article has ended up longer than intended. So well done if you’ve made it this far. I hope that it will encourage you to take up your pen, so to speak, and write. Why? Because it’s one of the means God has provided us to enrich our theology and our experience of him. Writing tends to be a wonderful blessing to those who undertake it—that has certainly been the case in my own life and faith.

In closing, let me add one last thing. Listen to how Eleanor concludes: "I know for sure my scribbles will encourage someone else going through the same or even better equip someone who will go through the deep waters." The theological refining and spiritual progress we make in writing can become a tremendous blessing to others who read it. As Augustine puts it in *On Christian Teaching*, "We should not shirk the duty of making plain to the minds \[and hearts] of others the truths which we have ourselves perceived, however hard they may be to comprehend, with as much effort and argument as may be necessary."