---
layout: post
title: The Necessity of Mixed-Sex Friendships For Christian Flourishing
author: gheslop
tags:
- Mixed-sex friendships
- Tolkien
- Kathy Keller
- Marriage
- Friendship
image: ''
featured: false
hidden: false

---
Last I wrote [a post](https://rekindle.co.za/content/2021-01-13-tolkien-friendship-versus-marriage "Tolkien: Marriage Versus Friendship") exploring the tension or conflict between friendship and marriage in J. R. R. Tolkien’s _The Lord Of The Rings_. I argued that towards the end of his work Tolkien undoes the wonderfully rich theme of friendship he develops throughout. In the last chapter we learn that as long as Frodo remains in Middle-Earth, Sam will be “torn.” Sam will forever be strung between Rosie and his old master. Tolkien even contrasts being torn with becoming whole or healed. In other words, Sam would have experienced an ongoing unrest as long as both Frodo and Rosie were in his life. As I said in that post, I believe this is how many of us perceive marriage: one relationship to rule them all.

Far from being a literary phenomenon, much of the thinking I’ve encountered in the church is identical to and often more explicit than Tolkien’s in _The Lord Of The Rings_. For starters, many Christians have swallowed [the unbiblical idea of a soulmate](https://rekindle.co.za/content/2020-12-03-john-calvin-marriage-singleness "Does Marriage Complete Us?"), the other half who completes us in marriage. Related to this, many Christians bow down to the cultural idol of romance, [exalting marriage as the human ideal](https://rekindle.co.za/content/2020-11-12-1-corinthians-7-is-it-better-to-marry "Is Is Better To Marry?"). Once we adopt these outlooks it is no surprise that friendships are shed after we wed. These and other reasons mean that the marriage relationship quickly overshadows and often excludes deep, intimate, and meaningful friendships. My spouse becomes my best friend—and by “best” I mean ‘only.’

Typically, our closest friends are members of the same sex. I realise that this is a generalisation but I hope you will allow it. This was certainly my experience until 2013, when I developed a close friendship with a female colleague. Since then I have delighted in a clutch of deep friendships with women. Even though we all know the fixed trajectory of all intimate mixed-sex relationships is towards the bedroom, I am yet to sleep with any of them. Yet mixed-sex friendships are not only rare in the church, they are often actively discouraged. So in 2018 I set out to challenge [the suspicion](Can I Be Friends With Girls? "https://rekindle.co.za/content/can-i-be-friends-with-girls/") with which many Christians treat mixed-sex friendships, believing that sexual purity or marital fidelity or both will inevitably be compromised.

This brings me to the crux of this post. In the post about mixed-sex friendships (linked above) I relayed the testimony I heard from a pastor years ago. A close female friend had been instrumental in his conversation. But once he was a married Christian man it became apparent to him that he could not continue with that intimate friendship. This quenched the spirit of his testimony. To be honest, I found it hard to celebrate his conversion because it involved the decision to actively abandon a close friend. Nowhere in the New Testament are we exhorted to mortify mixed-sex friendships once married. Do we really need to ‘put off’ these friendships? Are men better off limiting their intimate friendships to other men? Should women avoid close friendships with men? By now I’m sure you can anticipate my answer to all of those questions: No.

I recently preached on [Philippians 2:1-4](https://rekindle.co.za/content/2020-07-27-philippians-2-1-4-devotional "Philippians 2:1-4 Devotional"). In the course of the sermon I quoted the illustrious German theologian Karl Barth. In his commentary on Romans he writes: “What the gospel demands of us is more than notice, or understanding, or sympathy. It demands participation, comprehension, co-operation.” Barth’s choice of “participation” and “co-operation” fits well with [Philippians 1:28](https://rekindle.co.za/content/2020-07-20-philippians-1-27-30-devotional "Philippians 1:27-30 Devotional"), where Paul is exhorting Christians to stand firm, in one mind, striving side by side for sake of the gospel. To use Paul’s phrase in 1:27, a life worthy of the gospel is one that is relationally rich rather than tragically narrow. How will we accomplish this if we allow legalism to rule out friendships between men and women? Should we really limit our participation, or partnership, striving in unison, encouragement, affection, and comfort for members of the same sex as us (1:27-2:2)?

Let me conclude this post with an endnote from Kathy Keller’s chapter in _The Meaning Of Marriage_. In her discussion of complementarianism, Kathy expounds Genesis 2:18, “It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him a helper fit for him.” Without denying the complementary nature of the genders in marriage, she argues that this text indicates the necessity for “cross-gender” discipleship, which we might hold closely to mixed-sex friendships. She writes, “We need the friendship and fellowship of persons of the opposite sex—whether they are siblings and relatives, or Christian brothers and sisters, or friends, or spouses. There are always ways in which we need the ‘stretching’ and enriching experience of cross-gender interaction. There are things you will only be able to learn (either through counsel or example) from people of the other sex.”